---
layout: post
title: Curd, Boltzmann's philosophy of science (1)
categories: [科学史, 物理学史, 科学哲学]
published: false
---

Martin Vincent Curd, Ludwig Boltzmann's philosophy of science: Theories, pictures and analogies, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1978.

* Preface (iv)
* I. Introduction (1)
* II. The philosophical and hagiographical background of Boltzmann's defense of mechanistic physics (10)
  * A. The hagiographical account of Boltzmann's dispute with his critics at the end of the nineteenth century (12)
  * B. The mechanical philosophy and the program of mechanistic reduction in the nineteenth century. Its problems and failures (27)
  * C. Was Boltzmann a realist after 1890? Boltzmann's picture theory of theories (41)
  * D. Was Boltzmann a realist before 1890? A critique of the conversion account (48)
  * E. Nineteenth-century attitudes towards atomism (61)
* III. Boltzmann and Maxwell (71)
  * A. The extent of Boltzmann's involvement with Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism and its general significance for Boltzmann's philosophical development (73)
  * B. Boltzmann, models and Maxwell's theory of electricity (80)
  * C. Boltzmann, Hertz and Maxwell on the nature of physical theory (103)
* IV. The emergeticist critique of mechanistic physics and Boltzmann's response (129)
  * A. Ostwald's energeticism prior to 1895 (133)
  * B. Helm's energeticism prior to 1895 (158)
  * C. The Lübeck Meeting (169)
  * D. Boltzmann's response to the energeticist challenge (190)
* V. Boltzmann and Mach (201)
  * A. Mach's critique of atomism and mechanistic physics (209)
  * B. Mach and Boltzmann on mechanics and explanation (222)
  * C. Boltzmann's papers in defense of atomism (239)
* VI. Conclusion (257)
* Appendices
  * A. Biographical sketch of Ludwig Boltzmann (260)
  * B. Helm's energeticist treatment of thermodymamics (262)
  * C. Helm's energeticist treatment of mechanics (270)
  * D. Passages in German (273)
* Bibliography (282)
	
  
